Re write of the cylc tutorial (#383)
cylc/cylc-doc: src/tutorial/runtime/introduction.rst

.. |task-waiting| image:: ../../img/task-job-icons/task-waiting.png
   :scale: 100%
   :align: middle

.. |task-submitted| image:: ../../img/task-job-icons/task-submitted.png
   :scale: 100%

>    :align: middle

Reviewer: If using these in multiple locations please put them in the `hyperlinks` file so that we don't have to maintain multiple copies.

      Defines the workflow in terms of :term:`tasks <task>` and
      :term:`dependencies <dependency>`.
   ``[runtime]``

>       Defines what runs, where and how tasks run.

Author: Returned to old

   * Running
   * Succeeded / Failed

The Cylc User Interfaces
------------------------

.. ifnotslides::

   To help you to keep track of a running workflow Cylc has
   - A graphical user interface (Cylc GUI).

>    - A text-based user interface (Cylc TUI).

Reviewer 2: This hasn't rendered properly
![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/61982285/152023414-1c2651ad-e470-4d21-b7ec-c107a13ce7ce.png)

Author: ... because the RST is just plain wrong - there should be a space separating the title from the bullets.

   * Running
   * Succeeded / Failed

The Cylc User Interfaces
------------------------

.. ifnotslides::

>    To help you to keep track of a running workflow Cylc has

Author: ```suggestion
   To help you to keep track of a running workflow Cylc has

```

   - A graphical user interface (Cylc GUI).
   - A text-based user interface (Cylc TUI).

.. _tutorial.tui:

The Cylc TUI
^^^^^^^^^^^^

.. ifnotslides::

>    The Cylc TUI, (Text User Interface) is bundled with Cylc and

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   The Cylc TUI (Terminal User Interface) is bundled with Cylc and
```

   interface (the Cylc GUI) which can be used for monitoring and
   interaction.

>    The Cylc UI has different views you can use to examine your workflows.

Reviewer: If you're using the GUI in the tutorials we still need to introduce the main task state icons somehow.

Author: Done

   interface (the Cylc GUI) which can be used for monitoring and
   interaction.

   The Cylc UI has different views you can use to examine your workflows.

- Task states have grey icons.
- Job states have colour-coded squares.

.. csv-table::
   :header: Common task and job states, Description

   |task-waiting|, Task waiting on other tasks
   |task-submitted| |job-submitted|, Job submitted
   |task-running| |job-running|, Job is running
   |task-succeeded| |job-succeeded|, Job has run successfully
   |task-failed| |job-failed|, Job failed

.. ifnotslides::

   .. seealso::

      Full list of :ref:`task-job-states`.

.. nextslide::

.. ifnotslides::

   This is the "tree" view:

.. figure:: ../img/cylc-gui-tree-view.png
   :figwidth: 75%
   :align: center

   Screenshot of the Cylc GUI in "Tree" view mode.

.. nextslide::

This is the "table" view:

.. figure:: ../img/cylc-gui-table-view.png
   :figwidth: 75%
   :align: center

   Screenshot of the Cylc GUI in "Table" view mode.

.. nextslide::

.. ifnotslides::

   There is a GUI "scan" (also known as "GScan") view on the left allowing you
   to navigate your workflows.

> .. TODO - re-do this figure when UI confusing elements removed.

Reviewer: ?

Link to issue?

Author: This: https://github.com/cylc/cylc-ui/issues/881

and

I can't find the ticket, but I think that we were going to remove this at some point:
![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/26465611/151994826-110344b2-cd59-443f-a24d-8456b1774e7a.png)

Author: > (Would love to auto-generate our screenshots, which I think is perfectly possible to do with Cypress!)

Nice

   interface (the Cylc GUI) which can be used for monitoring and
   interaction.

   The Cylc UI has different views you can use to examine your workflows.

- Task states have grey icons.
- Job states have colour-coded squares.

.. csv-table::
   :header: Common task and job states, Description

   |task-waiting|, Task waiting on other tasks
   |task-submitted| |job-submitted|, Job submitted
   |task-running| |job-running|, Job is running
   |task-succeeded| |job-succeeded|, Job has run successfully
   |task-failed| |job-failed|, Job failed

.. ifnotslides::

   .. seealso::

      Full list of :ref:`task-job-states`.

.. nextslide::

.. ifnotslides::

>    This is the "tree" view. The Cylc GUI has a "table" (of tasks) view.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   This is the "tree" view:
```

.. figure:: ../img/cylc-gui-tree-view.png
   :figwidth: 75%
   :align: center

   Screenshot of the Cylc GUI in "Tree" view mode.

.. nextslide::

> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion

This is the "table" view:

```

.. figure:: ../img/cylc-gui-table-view.png
   :figwidth: 75%
   :align: center

   Screenshot of the Cylc GUI in "Table" view mode.

.. nextslide::

.. ifnotslides::

>    There is a ``cylc scan`` view on the left allowing you to navigate your
>    workflows.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   There is a GUI "scan" (also known as "GScan") view on the left allowing you
   to navigate your workflows.
```

      :term:`job log files <job log>` by right-clicking on the task and
      selecting "View".

>       .. TODO REPLACE THIS IF APPROPRIATE: .. image:: ../img/cylc-gui-view-log.png

Reviewer: This content is not valid at the moment, will need to be commented out.

Can replace with the `cylc cat-log` command for the time being.

Author: This one makes sense, as the rest of the tip needs commenting and replacing with the cylc cat-log comment.

         ~/cylc-run/<workflow-name>/log/job/<cycle-point>/<task-name>/<job-submission-num>/

>       .. TODO REPLACE THIS IF APPROPRIATE: .. image:: ../img/cylc-gui-view-log.png

Reviewer: Ditto.

Author: I think that this is already commented, and I'm not sure what else needs commenting.

         :align: center
         :scale: 75%

Installing A Workflow
---------------------

.. ifnotslides::

   .. seealso::

      :ref:`The full guide to Cylc install <Installing-workflows>`.

   .. versionchanged:: 8.0.0

      ``cylc install`` is a new feature of Cylc 8.

   To allow you to separate the development and running of workflows
   Cylc provides a :term:`cylc install <install>` command.

For a workflow developed in

- ``~/cylc-src/my_workflow`` and
- ``/some/location/my_other_workflow``

respectively:

> .. code-block:: shell

Reviewer: FYI `shell` is the same as `bash` which is more commonly used in the docs.

Author: Changed for consistency.

   cylc install my_workflow

>    cylc install -C /some/location/my_other_workflow

Reviewer: Consider converting the `/some/location...` into a `<placeholder>` and using `sub` to match other examples.

Author: Sorry, I'm not sure I understand what you mean...

this:?
```
.. |nonstandardflowsource|: /some/other/location

Reviewer: Like this:

```rst
.. code-block:: sub

   cylc install <workflow>
   cylc install -C <path-to-workflow>
```

   workflow configurations - ``cylc validate``:

.. code-block:: sub

   cylc validate <path/to/workflow>
   cylc validate <workflow_id>  # For workflow in `~/cylc-run/`

.. ifnotslides::

   Here ``<path/to/workflow>`` is the path to the workflow's location within the
   filesystem (so if we create a workflow in ``~/cylc-src/foo`` we would put
   ``~/cylc-src/foo/flow.cylc``).

Running a workflow
------------------

.. ifnotslides::

   Now we have installed and validated our workflow we can run the
   workflow using the ``cylc play`` command.

.. code-block:: sub

   cylc play <workflow_id>

.. ifnotslides::

   The ``workflow_id`` is the name of the :term:`run directory` (i.e. ``<name>``
   would be ``foo`` in the above example).

Generated Workflow Files
------------------------

Numbered run directories
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

.. ifnotslides::

   .. seealso::

      :ref:`Installing-workflows` for a fuller description of Cylc install,
      including the option of naming rather than numbering runs.

   By default ``cylc install`` will install your workflow in a new
   numbered run directory each time you run ``cylc install``:

> .. code-block:: sub

Reviewer: There are no substitutions in this code block.

Use `sub` for:
```
Plain code that includes <substitutions>
```

Use Bash for:
```
echo 'Bash Code'
```

Use `console` for:

```
$ echo 'command line examples'
command line examples
```

   $ cylc install my_workflow
   INSTALLED my_workflow/run1 from ...
   $ cylc install my_workflow
   INSTALLED my_workflow/run2 from ...

   # The most recent ``runX`` directory is symlinked to ``runN``
   $ ls -l ~/cylc-run/my_workflow/runN
   ~/cylc-run/baz/runN -> run2

.. ifnotslides::

   Each time you run ``cylc install`` a symlink pointing to the newest run
   directory called ``runN`` will be created.

   You can run cylc scripts pointing to a specific run number, but if you don't
   ``runN`` will be used:

> .. code-block:: sub

Reviewer: ```suggestion
.. code-block:: console
```

         ~/cylc-run/<workflow-name>/log/job/<cycle-point>/<task-name>/<job-submission-num>/

      .. TODO REPLACE THIS IF APPROPRIATE

         .. image:: ../img/cylc-gui-view-log.png
            :align: center
            :scale: 75%

Installing A Workflow
---------------------

.. ifnotslides::

   .. seealso::

      :ref:`The full guide to Cylc install <Installing-workflows>`.

   To allow you to separate the development and running of workflows
   Cylc provides a :term:`cylc install <install>` command.

From ``cylc-src/my_workflow``
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

.. code-block:: bash

   cylc install my_workflow

.. ifnotslides::

   will install your workflow in ``~/cylc-run/my_workflow/runN``.

From a workflow developed in an arbitrary location
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

.. code-block:: sub

>    cylc install -C /some/location/my_other_workflow

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   cylc install -C <path_to_workflow>
```

.. ifnotslides::

   will install your workflow in ``~/cylc-run/my_other_workflow/runN``.

   .. note::

      You can still develop workflows in ``~/cylc-run``, but this is not
      recommended because development work may
      change the behaviour of the workflow as it is running.

Validating A Workflow
---------------------

.. ifnotslides::

   It is a good idea to check a workflow definition for errors before running
   it. Cylc provides a command which automatically checks the validity of
   workflow configurations - ``cylc validate``:

.. code-block:: console

   $ cylc validate <path/to/workflow>
   $ cylc validate <workflow_id>  # For workflow in `~/cylc-run/`

.. ifnotslides::

   Here ``<path/to/workflow>`` is the path to the workflow's location within the

>    filesystem (e.g. ``~/cylc-src/foo``).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   root source directory (e.g. ``~/cylc-src/``).
```

   .. tip::

      You can use ``cylc cat-log <workflow-name>//<cycle-point>/<task-name>``

>       to view the content of this file/.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
      to view the content of job logs.
```

         ~/cylc-run/<workflow-name>/log/job/<cycle-point>/<task-name>/<job-submission-num>/

      .. TODO REPLACE THIS IF APPROPRIATE

         .. image:: ../img/cylc-gui-view-log.png
            :align: center
            :scale: 75%

Installing A Workflow
---------------------

.. ifnotslides::

   .. seealso::

      :ref:`The full guide to Cylc install <Installing-workflows>`.

>    .. versionchanged:: 8.0.0
> 
>       ``cylc install`` is a new feature of Cylc 8.
> 

Reviewer 2: Not sure we should bother with these for the tutorials; they are more useful for the reference section of the docs. Otherwise we will have inconsistency within the tutorials when it comes to labelling new or changed features.
```suggestion
```

   To allow you to separate the development and running of workflows
   Cylc provides a :term:`cylc install <install>` command.

For a workflow developed in

- ``~/cylc-src/my_workflow`` and
- ``/some/location/my_other_workflow``

respectively:

.. code-block:: bash

   cylc install my_workflow
   cylc install -C /some/location/my_other_workflow

.. ifnotslides::

>    will install your workflow in ``~/cylc-run/my_workflow/runN``.

Reviewer 2: I would split the 2 examples i.e. write
> For a workflow developed in `X`:
> ```
> cylc install Y
>```
> will install...

for each

>    (RunN is actually a symlink to runX where X increments each time you
>    install a workflow)

Reviewer 2: I think this will be confusing to people new to `runN`. Probably leave it out of this section?
```suggestion
```

   .. note::

      You can still develop workflows in ``~/cylc-run``, but this is not
      recommended because development work may
      change the behaviour of the workflow as it is running.

Validating A Workflow
---------------------

.. ifnotslides::

   It is a good idea to check a workflow definition for errors before running
   it. Cylc provides a command which automatically checks the validity of
   workflow configurations - ``cylc validate``:

.. code-block:: console

   $ cylc validate <path/to/workflow>
   $ cylc validate <workflow_id>  # For workflow in `~/cylc-run/`

.. ifnotslides::

   Here ``<path/to/workflow>`` is the path to the workflow's location within the

>    filesystem (so if we create a workflow in ``~/cylc-src/foo`` we would put
>    ``~/cylc-src/foo/flow.cylc``).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   filesystem (e.g. ``~/cylc-src/foo``).
```

Running a workflow
------------------

.. ifnotslides::

   Now we have installed and validated our workflow we can run the
   workflow using the ``cylc play`` command.

.. code-block:: console

   $ cylc play <workflow_id>

.. ifnotslides::

>    The ``workflow_id`` is the name of the :term:`run directory` (i.e. ``<name>``

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   The :term:`workflow id` is the path of the :term:`run directory` relative
   to ``~/cylc-run``.
```

   would be ``foo`` in the above example).

Generated Workflow Files
------------------------

Numbered run directories
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

.. ifnotslides::

   .. seealso::

      :ref:`Installing-workflows` for a fuller description of Cylc install,
      including the option of naming rather than numbering runs.

   By default ``cylc install`` will install your workflow in a new
   numbered run directory each time you run ``cylc install``:

.. code-block:: sub

   $ cylc install my_workflow
   INSTALLED my_workflow/run1 from ...
   $ cylc install my_workflow
   INSTALLED my_workflow/run2 from ...

   # The most recent ``runX`` directory is symlinked to ``runN``
   $ ls -l ~/cylc-run/my_workflow/runN
   ~/cylc-run/baz/runN -> run2

.. ifnotslides::

>    Each time you run ``cylc install`` a symlink pointing to the newest run
>    directory called ``runN`` will be created.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   Each time you run ``cylc install``, a symlink called ``runN`` is
   created/updated, pointing to the newest run directory.
```

>    You can run cylc scripts pointing to a specific run number, but if you don't

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   You can run cylc commands using a specific run number, but if you don't,
```

   ``runN`` will be used:

.. code-block:: sub

   $ cylc validate my_workflow
   # is the same as
   $ cylc validate my_workflow/runN

>    # but not
>    $ cylc validate my_workflow/run1

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   # and the same as (in this case)
   $ cylc validate my_workflow/run2
```

Files created by ``cylc install``
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

.. ifnotslides::

   Cylc generates files and directories when it installs a workflow:

   ``log/``

>       ``log/install``

Reviewer 2: This might be mistaken as `log/log/install`
```suggestion
      ``install/``
```

         A record of the installation of this workflow.

.. ifslides::

   * ``log/``

>       * ``log/install``

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
      * ``install/``
```

Files created by ``cylc play``
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

.. ifnotslides::

   Cylc generates files and directories when it runs a workflow, namely:

   ``log``
      ``log/db``
         The database which Cylc uses to record the state of the workflow;

>       ``log/job``

Reviewer 2: As above

         ~/cylc-run/<workflow-name>/log/job/<cycle-point>/<task-name>/<job-submission-num>/

      .. TODO REPLACE THIS IF APPROPRIATE

         .. image:: ../img/cylc-gui-view-log.png
            :align: center
            :scale: 75%

Installing A Workflow
---------------------

.. ifnotslides::

   .. seealso::

      :ref:`The full guide to Cylc install <Installing-workflows>`.

   To allow you to separate the development and running of workflows
   Cylc provides a :term:`cylc install <install>` command.

From ``cylc-src/my_workflow``
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

.. code-block:: bash

   cylc install my_workflow

.. ifnotslides::

   will install your workflow in ``~/cylc-run/my_workflow/runN``.

From a workflow developed in an arbitrary location
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

> .. code-block:: bash

Reviewer: Why swap from `bash` to `sub`?

Author: ```suggestion
.. code-block:: sub
```

         ~/cylc-run/<workflow-name>/log/job/<cycle-point>/<task-name>/<job-submission-num>/

      .. TODO REPLACE THIS IF APPROPRIATE

         .. image:: ../img/cylc-gui-view-log.png
            :align: center
            :scale: 75%

Installing A Workflow
---------------------

.. ifnotslides::

   .. seealso::

      :ref:`The full guide to Cylc install <Installing-workflows>`.

   To allow you to separate the development and running of workflows
   Cylc provides a :term:`cylc install <install>` command.

From ``cylc-src/my_workflow``
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

.. code-block:: bash

   cylc install my_workflow

.. ifnotslides::

>    will install your workflow in ``~/cylc-run/my_workflow/runN``.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   will install the workflow in ``~/cylc-src/my_workflow`` into ``~/cylc-run/my_workflow/runN``.
```

From a workflow developed in an arbitrary location
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

.. code-block:: sub

   cylc install -C /some/location/my_other_workflow

.. ifnotslides::

>    will install your workflow in ``~/cylc-run/my_other_workflow/runN``.

Reviewer: We only need to introduce one working practice in the tutorial, would use the `cylc-src` approach, the `-C` option is unlikely to be used by most people.

Author: Much simpler.

   .. note::

>       You can still develop workflows in ``~/cylc-run``, but this is not
>       recommended because development work may
>       change the behaviour of the workflow as it is running.

Reviewer: > change the behaviour of the workflow as it is running

`cylc reinstall` suffers exactly the same problem.

Don't really need to raise this in the tutorial, if we do good to trim it down.

```suggestion
      You can edit workflows directly in ``~/cylc-run``, but this is not
      recommended.
```

Validating A Workflow
---------------------

.. ifnotslides::

   It is a good idea to check a workflow definition for errors before running
   it. Cylc provides a command which automatically checks the validity of
   workflow configurations - ``cylc validate``:

.. code-block:: console

   $ cylc validate <path/to/workflow>
   $ cylc validate <workflow_id>  # For workflow in `~/cylc-run/`

.. ifnotslides::

   Here ``<path/to/workflow>`` is the path to the workflow's location within the

>    root source directory (e.g. ``~/cylc-src/``).

Reviewer: There's no point installing then validating as `cylc play` now does all the validate stuff.

Perhaps introduce validate before install.

```
The ``cylc validate`` command can help to spot errors in the workflow before you install it.
```

There's an issue with the `<path/to/workflow>` substitution caused by a change with the UID branch. Relative references must now be explicit e.g:

```
.
./
./foo
./foo/bar
```

As opposed to implicit e.g:

```
foo
foo/bar
```

So `path/to/workflow` will now fail.

Author: I've moved the location of the introduction to before `cylc install` and removed the reference to absolute paths. I think that it's a good idea to inculcate the idea of validation before install.

Running a workflow
------------------

.. ifnotslides::

>    Now we have installed and validated our workflow we can run the
>    workflow using the ``cylc play`` command.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   Now we have installed the workflow we can run it
   using the ``cylc play`` command:
```

.. code-block:: console

   $ cylc play <workflow_id>

.. ifnotslides::

   The :term:`workflow id` is the path of the :term:`run directory` relative
   to ``~/cylc-run``.

Generated Workflow Files
------------------------

Numbered run directories
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

> 

Reviewer: Could do with trimming this down.

Author: Removed all the stuff about playing older runs - for the purpose of the tutorial it's overkill.

.. ifnotslides::

   .. seealso::

      :ref:`Installing-workflows` for a fuller description of Cylc install,
      including the option of naming rather than numbering runs.

   By default ``cylc install`` will install your workflow in a new
   numbered run directory each time you run ``cylc install``:

.. code-block:: console

   $ cylc install my_workflow
   INSTALLED my_workflow/run1 from ...
   $ cylc install my_workflow
   INSTALLED my_workflow/run2 from ...

   # The most recent ``runX`` directory is symlinked to ``runN``
   $ ls -l ~/cylc-run/my_workflow/runN
   ~/cylc-run/baz/runN -> run2

> .. ifnotslides::
> 
>    Each time you run ``cylc install``, a symlink called ``runN`` is
>    created/updated, pointing to the newest run directory.

Reviewer: Duplicate of `The most recent runX directory is symlinked to runN`.

Should try to reduce this (note the tutorial isn't supposed to be a substitute to the user guide, we need to cover topics quickly and can't spend too long dwelling on the CLI)

```suggestion
```

   You can run cylc commands using a specific run number, but if you don't,
   ``runN`` will be used:

.. code-block:: console

   $ cylc validate my_workflow
   # is the same as
   $ cylc validate my_workflow/runN
   # and the same as (in this case)
   $ cylc validate my_workflow/run2

> Files created by ``cylc install``
> ^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
> 
> .. ifnotslides::
> 
>    Cylc generates files and directories when it installs a workflow:
> 
>    ``log/install/``
>       A record of the installation of this workflow.
> 
> 
> .. ifslides::
> 
>    * ``log/install/``
> 
> 

Reviewer: Too much detail for a tutorial, we did not introduce the `rose-suite-run.log` file before:

```suggestion
```

   Cylc generates files and directories when it installs a workflow:

   ``log/install/``
      A record of the installation of this workflow.

.. ifslides::

   * ``log/install/``

> 

Reviewer 2: There are some more of these below, while you're at it. Would be nice to fix the inconsistency at ``flow-config/flow.cylc.processed``
```rst
   ``log``
      ``log/db``
         The database which Cylc uses to record the state of the workflow;
      ``log/job``
         The directory where the :term:`job log files <job log>` live;
      ``log/workflow``
         The directory where the :term:`workflow log files <workflow log>` live.
         These files are written by Cylc as the workflow is run and are useful for
         debugging purposes in the event of error.
      ``flow-config/flow.cylc.processed``
         A copy of the :cylc:conf:`flow.cylc` file made after any `Jinja2`_ has been
         processed - we will cover this in the
         :ref:`tutorial-cylc-consolidating-configuration` section.
```

   #. **Extension: Explore The Cylc GUI**

      * Try re-installing the workflow and running it from the GUI.

      * Try adding a new view(s).

        .. tip::

           You can do this from the "Add View" button (top-right):

           .. image:: ../img/cylc-gui-views-button.png
              :align: center
              :scale: 75%

      * Try pressing the "Pause" button which is found in the top left-hand
        corner of the GUI.

      * Try clicking on a task state icon. From the menu you could try:

        * "Trigger"

>         * "Reset State"

Reviewer: Ooh, just spotted, the "reset" command has been removed at Cylc 8:

```suggestion
```
